Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Aubrey de Grey. He's
a biomedical gerontologist, and today we're going to talk
about the science of aging and longevity. So Doctor
De Grey, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to everyone. Well,
thank you for having me.
So let me start by asking you first, what
got you interested in the topic of aging and
in approaching it scientifically?
The main thing that got me interested when I
was in my late twenties was uh the discovery
that hardly, hardly anybody else was interested. This was
something that I had never considered until that time.
I had always known and that it was obvious
to me that aging is the world's most important
problem and that it could in principle, be overcome
medically. Um, BUT it was so obvious to me
that I never discussed it with anybody and therefore
I never discovered that other people thought differently. Until
I met and married a biologist who accidentally taught
me a lot of biology over the dinner table,
but who also eventually, you know, I began to
realize she wasn't interested in aging, and I thought
that's crazy. Um, AND eventually I I found out
that. Almost all the other people I was meeting
had the same view, so I decided to stop
doing what I had been doing for the previous
decade or so, which was working in computer science
and artificial intelligence, and to switch fields and become
a biologist working on aging.
And what is aging? I mean, how do you
define it and how do you approach it from
a scientific perspective? Yeah,
aging can be defined very simply, but not too
simply. Some people try to define it as a
process that as some kind of unitary process that
just like happens. Um, THE right way to describe
it is the combination of two processes. Um, THE
first process goes on throughout life, even starting before
we're born. And it is a process of creation
of damage in the body. So essentially, the body,
of course, is a very, very complicated machine that
has many, many processes going on all the time
to keep us alive from one day to the
next, and that network creates changes to the molecular
and cellular composition and structure of the body, and
those changes, the critical thing is that those changes
accumulate over time. Which is fine for a long
time because the body is built to um to
tolerate a certain amount of those changes without a
significant decline in function. But eventually there's more of
the more of the changes than that, and that's
why it makes sense to call those changes damage.
Because eventually when you've got too much, the second
process kicks off, and that is the process where
the damage creates the decline in function, both mental
function and physical function, the pathologies of late life.
So that's all that aging is. Our metabolism creates
damage throughout life and eventually the damage starts to
create pathologies, and that eventually kills us.
Yes, and I'm going to ask you also about
the 7 deadly things or the 7 different types
of damage behind aging in a second, but before
that, why do we age? What are the evolutionary
origins of aging?
People got this wrong for a long time. Uh,
PEOPLE, when, when they started thinking about this, not
long after Darwin, they started to think, well, OK,
aging must exist for some kind of evolutionary reason.
Um, YOU know, there must be some advantage to
the species, even though there is clearly a disadvantage
to the individual. Um, BUT eventually in the middle
of the 20th century, people realized that that wasn't
correct. And, uh, one of my friends put it
very, very well, a long time ago. He said,
evolution is not a product of evolutionary intent, it
is a product of evolutionary neglect. In other words,
it's not that evolution wants us to age, it's
just that. Evolution is pretty much ambivalent about it.
It doesn't want us to age, but it only
slightly doesn't want us to, so it hasn't taken
the trouble to develop machinery to make us not
age.
How is biological age calculated?
Oh, so that's actually a really controversial, um, situation
right now. A lot of experts would say that
in fact, we shouldn't be using the term biological
age at all because aging is, you know, a
lot of different types of damage accumulating through different
mechanisms at different rates and therefore an individual's biological
age should not be expressed as one number. Um,
BUT of course in theory one could regard it
as one number if one had complete information. One
could say, well, It is somehow the um the
risk that one has of developing chronic conditions within
the next year, or one could define it in
terms of how long it's likely to be in
the context of current medicine before one starts to
exhibit chronic conditions of late life. Those kinds of
things. In terms of measuring it though, the technologies
that we have really are not up to it.
There are old fashioned ways to do it in
terms of basically function, you know, you measure how
strong somebody is, how good their memory is, things
like that, and those are pretty good. And then
there are measures that are based on omics, so
looking at the epigenetics of the blood, for example,
and me and and getting correlations from that, things
that change with age. Um, AND they're getting better.
At the moment, the single best measure of biological
age, if you insist on having one, is actually
still, uh, you know, sophisticated analysis of these functional
measures that I just mentioned. Um, THERE'S a clock
that's, um, there's a measure of biological age that's
been recently developed by a group in Singapore that
I think is, you know, pretty clearly outperforming everything
else right now.
Tell us about this concept of longevity escape velocity.
What is that?
OK, so that's a term that I coined about
20 odd years ago now, and it's quite simple.
The way in which we are going to bring
aging under medical control is going to be through
damage repair, not through slowing down the rate at
which damage, um. Is generated and also not through
making the body capable of withstanding more damage. Rather,
it's by removing damage every so often so that
even though it's being generated in the at the
natural rate, it never reaches the amount that the
body is unable to tolerate. And in that in
that scenario, um, you know, you are basically turning
back the clock, you're effectively reversing aging every so
often. So if we have a uh a a
portfolio, a panel of interventions of medicines that repair
a lot of the different types of damage in
the body, then we can keep someone healthy for
longer and alive for longer. However, What we have
to consider is the fact that some types of
damage are a lot easier to repair than others.
And the particularly difficult ones will still be accumulating
until we get ways to repair them, even if
we can repair the other ones. So, um, essentially
what I have put forward is that once we
have a panel of interventions that is fairly comprehensive,
that can give us perhaps 20 additional years of
extra life, then we will functionally be done. We
will have essentially done all we need to do,
because in those 20 years, we will be able
to develop. Repair strategies for some of the really
difficult damage so that we can give the same
people another 20 years, and so on. So basically
I defined this term longevity escape velocity as the
minimum rate at which scientists will have to improve
these interventions, the comprehensiveness of them, in order to
stay one step ahead of the problem, such that
people who are receiving state of the art medicines
at any time will not get biologically older.
Tell us now about the 7 different types of
damage behind aging, including cell loss and cell atrophy,
division, obsessed cells, death resistant cells, mitochondrial mutations, intracellular
waste products, extracellular waste products. And extracellular matrix stiffening.
Tell us about each of them.
So these are the seven categories of damage that
I put forward again more than 20 years ago
now, and I'm very pleased to say that this
classification has stood the test of time. There has
not been any bad new discovery in the past
25 years that. Has required me to add an
8th category, but I do want to emphasize that
within each category, there are lots of examples. So,
cell loss, for example, you know, it's simply when
cells die and they are not automatically replaced by
the division of other cells, right now. Um, You
know, uh, that's a pretty straightforward concept, but of
course it happens in different places in the body,
and the cells that are affected are different types
of cells. So in Parkinson's disease, for example, you
have, it's driven by the loss of a particular
type of neuron called a dopaminergic neuron, which is
in a particular small part of the brain called
the substantia nigra. Um, BUT it also happens in
the thymus, which is, uh, a place that's responsible
for a very important part of the immune system.
It also happens in the heart where you have
these things called pacemaker cells that are gradually lost.
Um, AND each of these cell types are different,
so you need to develop different treatments to repair
this damage, to restore the number of cells. But
in all cases, you should be able to use
stem cell therapy for that. Now that we have
things like. INDUCED pluripotent stem cells and so on,
we have the capacity to generate pretty much any
type of cell that we might like and inject
it into the right place so that it will
divide and transform into replacements for the cells that
the body is not replacing on its own. So
that's all great, uh, but of course these cell
therapies have a lot of diff have some differences
in detail, however, they do have a lot in
common. All stem cell therapies have a lot in
common as well. So that's why the classification is
useful. Even though there are lots and lots and
lots of different types of damage, they can be
grouped into this manageable number of categories for each
of which there is a generic repair approach.
What about uh telomeres and telomerase? Is it a
problem or is there anything we can do about
it?
So the popular um uh rendition of the role
of telomeres and telomerase in aging has always been
quite problematic. When people first discovered that telomeres get
shorter with cell division, there was a huge like
hype about the idea that this might be the
driver of aging, that cell division could only go
on for a finite amount of time, but that
was. Overlooking the fact that most of the cells
in our body, either they don't divide at all,
or if they do, it's very, very rare, they
divide like, you know, once a year if you're
lucky, kind of thing. And um that means that
it's OK for the telomeres to get shorter. They
don't get into a state where they are too
short for anything to for for the cell to
operate correctly. Um, AND furthermore. There was quite rapidly
a discovery. I mean, we knew that this thing
must exist, but it was discovered, um, of this
enzyme telomerase that compensates for the telomere shortening that
happens during cell division. And sure enough, it turns
out that the cells that do divide quite a
lot during life actually make some of this enzyme,
and therefore they don't have this problem of the
telomeres getting short, getting too short for the cell
to survive. Now, there may be some exceptions to
what I just said. There may be some cases
in the body where shortening of telomeres actually does
contribute to dysfunction. In the immune system especially, there
is some evidence for that. But generally it seems
not to be a big player in aging. Whereas
the opposite thing really is. So of course there's
one type of of one category of my seven
categories, which is called division obsessed cells, that's more
or less synonymous with cancer. And cancer is a
bad thing, obviously. So we'd like the cells in
a cancer not to be able to divide indefinitely.
We'd like them to kill themselves through telomere shortening
if possible. And I put forward an idea in,
I think 2002, uh, for how we might do
that. It was a very, very ambitious and you
know, some would say far-fetched idea, and a lot
of people said it could never work and certainly
right now it doesn't work, but what's fantastic is
that in the meantime people have developed a kind
of improved version of my idea. In which um
you can just use a small drug, a simple
molecule that achieves the same thing. It essentially takes
cell, if it gets into a cell that is
making a lot of telomerase, which is 90% of
all cancers, then the the cell will kill itself
very quickly. So, um, the, the idea of controlling
telomere elongation is very much alive and kicking and
a very important part of how we're going to
bring aging under control.
And how can aging be combat combated actually and
tell us specifically also about sense or engineered negligible
senescence.
Right, so, um, as I've been saying, there are
these various types of damage that accumulate. And if
we can repair these various types of damage in
various ways, stem cell therapy to repair loss of
cells or you know this drug I just mentioned
to get rid of cancer cells, or other drugs
called synolytics which get rid of zombie cells that
are death resistant, as I call them, and so
on. If we can do all these things, then
we will be combating aging. We will be turning
a biologically old person into a biologically young person,
and we can do that as often as we
like. As I mentioned earlier when you asked about
longevity escape velocity, the problem will get harder over
time because of the particularly difficult types of damage
that we can't yet repair, but if we are
rapid enough in improving our ability to do this
or that type of damage repair, then that's OK.
So that will essentially be the medical control of
aging and you know that's why I coined the
term sense, strategies for engineered negligible senescence. Senescence is
the word that biologists use when they want to
talk, you know, rigorously about aging because they want
to talk about the bad, the bad aspects of
getting old. Negligible senescence therefore means, um, you know,
uh, essentially bringing the rate of aging down so
low that you can't detect it. And that term
was coined actually negligible senescence uh at least 10
years before I came along. Um, TO describe the
natural phenomenon where some species appear not to age
in the wild. Um, AND then of course engineered
negligible escence means taking an organism like human beings
that does age and turning it into an organism
that doesn't using medicine.
And what would exactly be the goals of combating
aging? What goals do you have in mind?
It's perfectly simple. I don't want to get sick.
I don't want anyone else to get sick. You
know, people often focus on the radical life extension
aspect, but that's, that's incorrect. I don't think about
length of life very much. I just think about,
I don't wanna get sick. I don't, I don't
suppose you want to get sick. And it just
so happens that a side effect of staying healthy
is you stay alive with high probability. Most people
die from being sick these days. And of course,
most people get sick from having been born a
long time ago.
And what kinds of technologies and medical approaches do
we already have at our disposal to combat aging?
Basically nothing, but it's close. So at the moment,
of course, there's a huge industry selling, you know,
supplements and other kinds of devices that theoretically postpone
aging, but everybody knows that even if they work,
they only work a little bit, and of course
different things work for different people. So I wouldn't
call them really anti-aging medicine in the way that
we would like to have. However, A number of
the damage repair approaches that I um have described
over these years are now in clinical trials, so
they're pretty close to being available. There are clinical
trials for stem the stem cell therapies against Parkinson's,
for example. There are clinical trials of this drug.
Mention that kills off 90% of cancers. There are
clinical trials for synolytics, the drugs that kill off
senescent cells. It's moving very rapidly in the right
direction now. So I think within only a few
years we're going to see these things widely available,
and the benefits to health will be very large
indeed.
So I would like to ask you now about
two different kinds of drugs. The first one, I
don't know exactly about its current status, but at
least a few years ago people were talking about
it a lot. What do you make of metformin?
OK, so metformin is a very old drug that
was um originally developed to treat diabetes and. Maybe
10 or 15 years ago, people started to think
about whether it might have a much more general
effect on aging overall. And there was some evidence
that suggested that it did. People have actually since
then they have questioned whether that evidence is quite
as persuasive as it was originally thought to be,
but there's still pretty good evidence that metformin may
very well have general anti-aging effects. So first of
all, we would like to understand how, you know,
what does it do, and we kind of understand
that metformin gets in the way of what's called
the electron transport chain in mitochondria, so it basically
slows down the rate at which cells can make
ATP, the energy currency of the cell. That Is
something that's very similar to what happens if you're
in a famine, if you, you know, like, are
not eating as much as you would like. You
obviously, the way that um mitochondria make ATP is
by taking energy from nutrients, and if you're not
eating enough, then you'd have got fewer nutrients. Now.
Over the years, oh well, over the millennia, um,
evolution has developed ways to, um, respond to famine,
because of course famines happen in the real world.
And it turns out that it's evolutionarily beneficial to
reprioritize one's, what, what one, what, what the body
is doing in a famine relative to when food
is abundant. Essentially it comes down to when food
is abundant, it makes sense to grow really fast
and reproduce really fast so that you can reproduce
and pass on your genes before you get eaten
or whatever, um. But in a famine, there's not
much point in doing that because if you have
offspring, then those offspring will die of starvation before
they have their own offspring. So, um, it's best
to, you know, hunker down and and conserve energy
and so on and, and try to outlive the
famine. And of course, maybe you will, maybe you
won't, but, but evolution is all about a numbers
game, so it still makes sense. All right, so
pretty much all animals seem to do this. They
respond to famine, and that means they also respond
in the exact same way to situations within the
cell that resemble famine. So metformin is one of
those things. It's what's called, what's called a calorie
restriction mimetic. And some of the other most, um,
you know, high profile drugs that are believed to
have general effects on aging. Are also calorie restriction
mimetics. Generally they work by different mechanisms. For example,
there's a very famous drug called rapamycin, which works
by slowing down the synthesis of proteins. Um, YOU
know, essentially anything that gets in the way of
what the cell likes to do with energy, either
extracting it and making ATP or using the ATP
in this or that way, you know, it's tic
one way or another, um. So the question then
is, you know, is this the holy grail, and
unfortunately the answer is no. Long-lived species do not
get very much benefit from calorie restriction, from, from
eating too little, um, and therefore they also don't
get very much benefit from these calorie restriction mimetics.
The reason for this is very straightforward. It's simply
that in nature, long famines don't happen very often.
They happen less often than short famines, and that
means there is less evolutionary selective pressure. To develop
and maintain machinery to do this, you know, reprioritization
I was talking about.
How about rapamycin?
Well, right, I was just mentioning that for precisely
for that reason. Same deal. Everything I just said
about metformin, the exact same thing applies to rapamycin.
Mhm. OK. Uh, TELL us about methylation clocks. What
are they and can we use them to find
anti-aging treatments?
Right, so I mentioned the um Types of types
of clocks that there are right now, right? There
are clocks, there, there are measures of biological age
based on function, and there are measures of biological
age based on omics. So the epigenetic clocks are
a a subset of the omic clocks. They are
in fact the biggest subset. There are also transcriptomic
clocks and proteomic clocks and such like. But yeah,
I mean, these are quite fashionable right now because
they are new and they have improved a lot
over the past decade. Um, ESSENTIALLY what they do
is they look at changes to the, to, to
particular molecular modifications that cells make to their DNA,
um, and that these modifications sometimes change with age.
They see, you know, um, so you can look
at, you know, a lot of people of a
given age and you can say, well, OK, what
is the methylation state of these people, and you
can look at a higher age and you can
see whether there are differences in the methylation state
on average across a population of a given age.
And then, of course, you can, you can ask
for any other person. You can say, well, OK,
what is their actual age and what. Is their
methylation age, in other words, what is the age
that is typical of someone who who has that
methylation state? And that's their biological age by methylation.
These things are still not very accurate, but they're
getting better.
How close would you say is biomedical technology to
significantly postponing aging?
Well, the, um, current prediction that I make is
that we have a 50% chance of reaching longevity
escape velocity before the end of, before 2040. So
in other words, in 12 to 15 years towards
the end of the 2030s. Um, NOW, of course.
As I mentioned, some of the technologies that are
going to be relevant to this are already in
clinical trials and therefore they will be around and
available quite a lot sooner. And it's possible that
that will be enough to get us to longevity
escape velocity. But I, I, I, I'm more cautious
than that. I think that some of the things
that we're going to need to give us that
initial 20 years of postponement of aging are among
the difficult things that are not in clinical trials
yet and probably won't be in clinical trials for
several more years.
Do you think it would be possible to postpone
aging indefinitely, and would it be possible to not
die?
So first of all, yes, I think we can
postpone aging indefinitely, but the way we will do
it is by this longevity escape velocity thing. First,
we will postpone it by 20 years and then
during those 20 years, we will figure out how
to postpone it another 20 years and so on.
If you think about the mathematics of that, it
gets progressively easier to get the next 20 years
than it was for the previous 20 years. So,
I'm completely certain that once we get those 1st
20 years, we will never slip below longevity escape
velocity again. We will definitely proceed easily, rapidly enough
to um to to keep one step ahead of
the problem. So in other words, we will not
actually have at any point the actual technology that
completely eliminates aging, but we won't need to have
it. The actual impact on us will be equivalent
to what it would be if we did have
that. Um, AS regards death, um, you know, I,
one of the things that I constantly complain about
is that the media are very fond of saying
death when they mean aging. And the reason that's
a huge problem is because everybody knows that. We
can't prevent death with technology, you know, there are
just too many ways to um to die that
have nothing to do with how long ago you
were born. Whether it's being hit by a truck
or the planet being hit by an asteroid or
whatever. And so You know, basically what That confusion
of words creates is a kind of subliminal belief
that aging is the same, that aging can also
not be defeated by technology, which is incorrect, it's
untrue, but it kind of makes people feel comfortable.
It helps them to put it, put aging out
of their minds. So I'm quite sure that journalists
do this on purpose, that they say death when
they mean aging just to get readership. And it's
very damaging.
Yeah, that's also the reason why I separated the
question into two different questions, because I wanted you
to address aging and death separately here. Do you
think that most doctors apply this framework or this
approach you have to aging to their practice in
any way?
Oh, certainly not, not yet. And that's because doctors
are only able to do things that already exist.
They are only able to give people medicines that
have already been approved. Now, as I mentioned, none
of this is approved yet. Some of these things
are close. They're in clinical trials and so they
may be approved in the next few years and
then absolutely that's going to happen. But I do
not blame doctors for focusing only on what they
can currently do, because that's a that's a big
job. Um, YOU know, if they try to spend
their time trying to anticipate things that they can't
yet do because they haven't been developed yet or
haven't been approved yet, then, you know, that would
make them less effective. So that's fine.
So let me ask you now just a couple
of questions about the possible implications that solving aging
could have for women physiologically. Would women still have
menopause if we solved aging?
Not if they don't want to. So the ovary
is just another organ. It can be regenerated and
rejuvenated just like any other. And in fact, people
are already making good progress in this, in creating
ways to regenerate follicles and regenerate ocytes. Normally the
egg cells in a woman's ovary are all created
before the woman had even been born. But there's
no inherent reason why that should be the case.
We may be able to regenerate an ovary and
give it more follicles and more oocytes in situ.
Another possibility is to is to grow an ovary
outside of the body and then transplant it surgically.
Um, AND these are, these things are already being
explored. Now, of course, the question is, do you
want that as a woman? Uh, AND some, some
women are looking forward to menopause. They don't enjoy,
you know, having periods. Um, BUT of course, there's
also no reason why one would not be able
to turn it on and off and have all
the, you know, benefits without the, um, side effects.
And do you think that if women did not
have menopause anymore, it would influence birth rates?
Yes, but not in the way that you're probably
thinking. They Um, The world we have seen, you
know, has each society goes through this thing called
the demographic transition where women reach a certain level
of prosperity and education and emancipation, and they have
choices and they suddenly have far fewer children than
they than they used to. Mhm. And that's interesting,
but the thing is, they also have those children
later. Only a bit later because, of course, we
have menopause right now, so if you want children
at all, then there's a deadline. But the point
is they have them a bit later. Why? Of
course, different women have different reasons, but, you know,
just the other things they want to do with
their lives before they do this terribly time consuming
thing, right? Um, SO if they didn't have the
deadline, if they didn't have menopause, then it stands,
it, it seems very likely that most women who
are postponing having kids a little bit will just
postpone having kids a lot instead, you know, by
another decade and another decade because they can. And
therefore, what I actually think is likely is that.
The number of Um, babies that are born in
any given calendar year worldwide, um, would actually go
down as a result of the opportunity to have
more, which is quite counterintuitive, but I'm pretty sure
of it.
Yeah, that's a very interesting take on this issue
because another question that I have here is, wouldn't
solving aging lead to massive overpopulation, because I mean
people would be living much, much longer. So
right, so if you I mean, so if you
look at what people are projecting now, they, uh,
the United Nations, for example, they say that world
population will come to a maximum in like the
2060 or 2070 or something like that. But of
course that only, that's only true if people continue
to die. And the UN has not taken my
kinds of predictions into account yet. So, um. We
would certainly expect that there will be almost no
death, because, you know, we will not have death
from aging and we'll probably also get quite a
lot better at not having death from road accidents
and so on either, right? Um, SO hardly any
death, and there will be some birth. I mean,
we don't know whether having kids will go out
of fashion, but the chances are it probably won't.
So, um, we'll have more, more kids. But then
we have to actually do the arithmetic. We have
to quantify this and say, OK, even taking a
pessimistic scenario where. What I said about menopause just
now does not happen and women carry on having,
let's say 1 kid every 10 years on average,
something like that, then, um, you know, what's going
to happen? Turns out that it's gonna take a
really, really long time before we have an overpopulation
problem. At the moment, we have 8 billion people
on the planet, but we also have well over
8 billion acres of land, even if you don't
include land that's unpleasant to live in, right? So
that means every single person on the planet could
have their own acre as of today, and we
still wouldn't have to live anywhere unpleasant. Now. Um,
Of course, people say, OK, we've got an overpopulation
problem today, you know, and it's true, we do,
but it's not because there's not enough space. It's
because. People are making too much pollution, you know,
pumping too much carbon into the atmosphere or, you
know, plastics that, that build up in the oceans,
things like that. And hello, uh, you know, people
forget that we're actually also, at the same time
as we're developing technology to control aging, we're also
developing technology to, Address those problems, you know, capturing
carbon from the atmosphere and, you know, developing bacteria
that eat plastics, things like that. And that no.
Excuse me, those technologies are going to be completely
happening way before we have any kind of demographic
impact on the pop on the world arising from
bringing aging under control, way before. So the whole
idea of overpopulation is definitely, you know, described wrongly.
We will have a diminishing overpopulation problem over the
next century, whatever happens to aging, and it will
be. At least a few centuries before we actually
get A genuine problem of not having enough space,
um, even in a pessimistic scenario with regard to
fertility rates, and it's a very bad idea to
try to predict or to try to, you know,
to make decisions about what we should do today
on the basis of what we think might happen
a few 100 years in the future.
I understand. What about, and this is more of
an economics question I guess, but one that I
would imagine many people would worry about. What about
retirement? Do you think that people would be forced
to work much longer and would people really want
to work longer?
So this is another case where people look at
a post-aging world and they forget that it's going
to be a different world in other ways as
well. So just in the same way that we
will have technology that that maintains that removes carbon
from the atmosphere or whatever, similarly, We will have
automation. Automation is coming really fast. You know, again,
let's talk about the United Nations. Pretty conservative organization,
but they say clearly that by 2050, most of
the jobs that people currently have won't exist. And
of course when that happened the last time, a
couple of 100 years ago in the industrial revolution,
We maintained the economy of essentially full employment because
the jobs that went away in manufacturing and in
agriculture. Were replaced by this new thing called the
service industry. That's not gonna happen this time around,
uh, you know, how many people do you need
in the entertainment industry, right? It's not gonna happen.
So, that means that the economy will be redesigned
around ideas like universal basic income to mean that.
You, the, the retirement age will not have to
go up. In fact, it will do the opposite,
it will come down. You know, hardly anybody will
end up working because we just won't need very
many people. It will be more, we'll have more
prosperity as a result of having machines do all
the things that we have to do today. Now,
of course, there are plenty of other changes to
society that will happen in, in relation to that.
In particular, you know, we have to, we have
to think about, um, Self-esteem, you know, why do
people value themselves? At the moment, a lot of
people get their value in life from the work
that they do, from the fact that they receive
a paycheck and they know that they are benefiting
humanity even though they don't see, they don't actually
interact with the people they are benefiting. So we
may see a shift into a more um natural
society where people get most of their self-esteem and
self-worth from actual direct personal interactions with people rather
than this rather second class indirect interaction.
OK, so I have just one last question. What
do you think of the anti-aging industry as it
is currently? I mean, with all the Things that
we see online and elsewhere of people making claims
about nutrition, about supplements, and so on. I mean,
with the things that we have access to right
now when it comes to aging, what do you
think about it?
Yeah, so, I mean, the anti-aging industry has of
course existed since the dawn of time. You know,
uh, people have been trying to sell stuff that
doesn't work in order to, you know, on the
basis that it will make people live longer, and
it, it's, you know, it's, it's existed since forever.
In fact, when I started to get going in
my career, um, and started to give public speech,
talks and so on, it was very useful that
I look the way I do because nobody can
look at me and think that I could possibly
be in this for personal financial gain. Um, YOU
know, it, it, I, so I was able to
distance myself from all of that, which was important
because of course I was making very eye-catching predictions
about how much we would be able to keep
people healthy, um. But now things are rather different
because side by side with that industry, the anti-aging
industry, there is another thing which is normally called
the longevity industry, and that consists, that didn't exist
at all until 10 years ago. Um, IT consists
of companies that are typically quite small still, though
some of them have have become quite big now.
Um, AND, um, that are developing these new medicines
I'm talking about that are much more powerful and
effective than anything that's existed in the past. And
a lot of money is going into those companies,
and rightly so, and those are the people that
are spearheaded. These clinical trials that we're talking about
and the um other work that have not yet
got to clinical trials, but we'll do so soon.
So I think that's a very important distinction to
make. The longevity industry is not snake oil at
all. It is definitely focusing on the real problem
and the real solutions.
Right. Great. So just before we go, Doctor De
Grey, would you like to tell people where they
can find your work on the internet?
Sure, yeah, we haven't talked about my work at
all. Um, I, I should emphasize that I don't
have a company. I have a nonprofit, a charity
based in California. It's called Longevity Escape Velocity Foundation.
The website is LEVF.org. I'm sure you will put
it in the show notes. And of course there,
there's plenty of information about what we do and
what we want to do. There's also a nice
big friendly donate button because everything we do costs
money. And um and of course it, it's easy
to get hold of me on LinkedIn or Twitter
or whatever. So, um, yeah, I mean, I encourage
people to contact me if they want to. And
also if anyone wants to support this work, we
will be eternally grateful because it's really life saving
work. It's the most important work that anyone's doing
worldwide. That's our sincere belief.
Great, I will leave links to that in the
description of the interview and thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been a real pleasure to talk with you.
Well, likewise, thank you for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nico Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate von Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Janus
Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.